 

 Note: This documentation set is for the Standard, Plus, Pay-as-you-go, and Frontline editions of Gemini Enterprise. For the Business edition documentation, see the Gemini Enterprise - Business edition Help Center .

 Home

 Documentation

 AI and ML

 Gemini Enterprise

 Administrator guide

 Send feedback

 Set up your custom MCP server data store 

 Stay organized with collections

 Save and categorize content based on your preferences.

 Key Term: In Gemini Enterprise,
the term data store can be used interchangeably with the term
 connector or data connector . 
 Key Term: In the Model Context Protocol
(MCP) specification, capabilities are called tools . In
Gemini Enterprise data stores, these tools are referred to as
 actions . The two terms can be used interchangeably. 

This page explains how to connect your data sources using a custom Model Context
Protocol (MCP) server, letting Gemini Enterprise securely access your company&#39;s
private data.

The custom MCP data store lets you integrate public tools, as well as
MCP-compliant third-party systems, directly into Gemini Enterprise. This
approach provides a unified method to connect legacy systems when standard
connectors are unavailable. With this integration, your AI agents can access
business-critical information and specialized logic within your infrastructure.

Limitations

The custom MCP server has the following limitations:

 Server-Sent Events (SSE) : The old SSE transport is not supported. The
connector exclusively supports the new StreamableHTTP transport.

 TLS certificate requirement : Both public and private MCP servers must
be configured with a TLS certificate signed by a publicly trusted Certificate
Authority (CA). Self-signed certificates are not supported.

 Actions limit : To ensure optimal performance, limit the number of enabled
actions in your custom MCP server data store to 100 at a time. For more
information, see Enable actions .

 Existing data stores : Connecting to an existing data store is not
supported. You must create and register a new custom MCP server data store
directly within your Gemini Enterprise app.

 VPC Service Controls : Egress controls are enforced through organization
policy constraints, such as allowedEgressFqdns and allowedDataSources ,
rather than runtime traffic enforcement. Custom MCP servers are supported in
VPC Service Controls-enabled projects when you explicitly allow the required
egress domains and data sources. For more information, see
 Override the organization policy for Custom MCP data stores .

Before you begin

Before you set up your custom MCP server connection, ensure you perform the
following:

Several organization policy constraints apply to Custom MCP data stores. You
must:

Override the organization policy constraint that blocks Custom MCP
data store creation. For more information, see
 Override the organization policy for Custom MCP data stores .

Explicitly allow the fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) for your custom
MCP server URL, authorization URL, and token URL. For more information, see
 Configure allowed egress FQDNs .

 Note: You only need to add the domain name, not the full URL. For example,
for an MCP server
URL of https://api.cymbal.com/mcp with authorization and token URLs on
 auth.cymbal.com , allow both api.cymbal.com and auth.cymbal.com . 

If project enforcement is enabled or the project is VPC Service Controls-protected, you
must add custom_mcp to the allowed data sources. See
 Configure allowed data sources .

Grant the Discovery Engine Editor role
( roles/discoveryengine.editor ). This role is required for your
administrator to create the data store.

To grant this role, do the following:

In the Google Cloud console, go to the IAM page.

 Go
to IAM 

Locate the user account, and click the edit Edit icon.

Grant the Discovery Engine Editor role to your user.
For more information, see IAM
roles and permissions .

Register Gemini Enterprise as an OAuth client application with your identity
provider (for example, Okta, Azure AD, or Google).

To register the app, do the following:

Set the authorization redirect URL to
 https://vertexaisearch.cloud.google.com/oauth-redirect .

Grant necessary OAuth scopes to the client app.

After you register the client app, obtain the client_id and client_secret 
that are needed for configuring the custom MCP server data store in the
following steps.

If your custom MCP server is hosted on Cloud Run and requires
authentication, grant the Cloud Run Invoker ( roles/run.invoker ) role to
the service agent. For more information, see
 Set up authentication for a custom MCP server on Cloud Run .

Set up authentication for a custom MCP server on Cloud Run

If your custom MCP server is hosted on Cloud Run and requires
authentication, Gemini Enterprise can securely connect to private services
that do not allow public access.

How authentication works

When you connect to a Cloud Run service, Gemini Enterprise automatically sends the following authorization headers in each request:

 X-Serverless-Authorization : Contains a Google-signed ID token that authenticates the Gemini Enterprise service agent.

 Authorization : Preserves the user's OAuth token intact.

 Note : Gemini Enterprise automatically sends the Google-signed ID token only when you connect to a default Cloud Run URL that ends in .run.app . The ID token is not sent if your service uses a custom domain. 

Grant access to the service agent

To authorize Gemini Enterprise to invoke your private Cloud Run
service, grant the Cloud Run Invoker ( roles/run.invoker ) role to the
Gemini Enterprise service agent on the receiving service.

The service agent email uses the following format: 
service- PROJECT_NUMBER @gcp-sa-discoveryengine.iam.gserviceaccount.com

Replace PROJECT_NUMBER with the project number of the
Google Cloud project that hosts your Gemini Enterprise app.

For instructions on how to grant IAM roles on a service, see
 Authenticating service-to-service .

Create the custom MCP server data store

 Note: By default, outbound traffic to your custom MCP server doesn&#39;t route
through Agent Gateway 
unless you configure egress routing in the Advanced options section. 

To set up the configuration flow, follow these steps:

In the Google Cloud console, go to the Gemini Enterprise page.

 Gemini Enterprise 

In the navigation menu, click Data stores .

Click add Create
data store .

On the Select a data source page, enter Custom MCP Server into the
 Search sources field. The Custom MCP Server card
displays.

Click Add MCP server . The MCP Server Configuration page displays.

In the Authentication settings section, select one of the following
options:

 No authentication : Select this option if your MCP server does not
require authentication.

Enter the MCP Server URL . This is the endpoint where your MCP
server is hosted. It must be an HTTPS URL. Gemini Enterprise
only supports the StreamableHTTP transport. The URL often ends
with /mcp . For example, https://mcp.example.com/mcp .

 Note : If your server is hosted on Cloud Run, enter your default service URL ending in .run.app . Gemini Enterprise automatically sends a Google-signed ID token for IAM authentication. 

Click Continue .

 OAuth 2.0 : Select this option to add authentication.

Enter the values in the following required fields:

 Field 
 Description 

 MCP Server URL 
 This is the endpoint where your MCP server is hosted. It must be an HTTPS URL. Gemini Enterprise only supports the StreamableHTTP transport. The URL often ends with /mcp . For example, https://mcp.example.com/mcp .
 Note : If your server is hosted on Cloud Run, enter your default service URL ending in .run.app . Gemini Enterprise automatically sends a Google-signed ID token for IAM authentication. 

 Authorization URL 
 The base URL for the user to authorize Gemini Enterprise to access your MCP server. For example, https://mcp.example.com/authorize .
 Note : Enter only the base URL, without query parameters. Gemini Enterprise automatically appends standard OAuth parameters (such as client_id , redirect_uri , and scope ) during authorization. If your authorization server requires additional parameters, specify them in the Authorization URL Parameters field. 

 Authorization URL Parameters 
 Optional. Any additional parameters required by your authorization
 URL. For example, to get a refresh token from a Google MCP server,
 enter &access_type=offline&prompt=consent .
 If your
 authorization server requires an audience parameter, you
 can add it as a parameter in this setting. For example,
 &audience=https://api.your-domain.com/v1/ .

 Token URL 

 The endpoint used to exchange the authorization code for an access
 token during OAuth authentication. For example,
 https://mcp.cymbal.com/token .

 Client ID 
 The unique identifier of the OAuth app that you registered in your identity provider to represent Gemini Enterprise. 

 Enable PKCE Support 

 Optional. Select this checkbox to enable Proof Key for Code
 Exchange (PKCE, RFC 7636) for additional OAuth security.
 We recommend this setting if your MCP server's OAuth provider
 supports PKCE.

 Client Secret 

 The confidential key associated with the OAuth app that you
 registered in
 your identity provider to represent Gemini Enterprise.

 Scopes 
 The permissions that define what actions Gemini Enterprise is allowed to perform on behalf of a user, or what data it's allowed to access. The scopes are used to access the MCP server. Gemini Enterprise requests these scopes during user authorization. Ensure that your OAuth app is configured to use these scopes.
 When you specify scopes, consider the following:

Provide a space-separated list of scopes. For example, for Box, you provide: root_readwrite manage_managed_users manage_groups .

Ensure the scopes provided are sufficient to let the user sign in and use the tools or actions enabled by the administrator; otherwise, the agent cannot access your app.

A common scope is offline_access , which lets the app request a refresh token.

Click Verify Auth .

Click Continue .

Click Continue .

In the Configure your data connector section, select the Location of
your data connector from the Multi-region field list.

In Your data connector name field, enter a name for your data store.

Click Create . Gemini Enterprise creates your data store and
displays your data stores on the Data Stores page.

 Note: By default, no tools or actions from
your custom MCP servers are enabled. You must enable the tools or actions.
For more information, see Enable actions . 

 Verify the state of the custom MCP server 

To verify the state of the custom MCP server, do the following:

Click your data store in the Data stores list. The details of
your data store display.

Monitor the state of your data store until it changes to
 Active . After the state of your data store changes from Creating 
to Active , your custom MCP server data store is ready to be used.

Enable actions

 Key Term: In the Model Context Protocol
(MCP) specification, capabilities are called tools . In
Gemini Enterprise data stores, these tools are referred to as
 actions . The two terms can be used interchangeably. 

By default, all actions are turned off. When you connect an MCP server, all of
its tools are imported and displayed as actions in the Gemini Enterprise
data store. To ensure an
optimal experience, you can enable up to 100 actions at a time. To enable these
actions for your users, follow these steps:

Go to your custom MCP server data store.

Click Actions &gt; Reload custom actions to reauthenticate.

 Note: This action performs a tools/list call
on the MCP server to retrieve available tools, which are then displayed on
the screen. 

Select the actions to enable.

Click Enable actions .

Configure annotations to skip user confirmation

When tools from your MCP server are imported as actions into the
Gemini Enterprise data store, Gemini Enterprise checks their tool annotations to
determine if user confirmation is required. By default, all calls to any
action require confirmation from the user, because Gemini Enterprise assumes
that any operation is potentially destructive and can mutate data.

If your server provides read-only functionality (such as querying a database)
and you want to skip this confirmation for a smoother user experience, you can
configure annotations in the specifications of your MCP tools before they are
imported as actions.

We recommend configuring the following annotations in your MCP tool definitions
to manage user confirmation for data store actions:

 readOnlyHint : Add this annotation to your tool definition if the
 operation is non-destructive and only reads data. The tool execution bypasses
 user confirmation.

 destructiveHint : Explicitly use this annotation if the tool modifies
 data. This maintains the default confirmation behavior.

 For example, in Python: 

 @mcp . tool ( annotations = { 
 "destructiveHint" : False , 
 "readOnlyHint" : True 
 }) 

To ensure that your changes are reflected in your setup, reload custom actions.
For more information, see Enable actions .

What's next

To protect against malicious inputs and outputs, enable Model Armor. For more
information, see
 Enable Model Armor .

If you want to query your MCP server using a custom agent, instead of the
Gemini Enterprise assistant, see
 Create an agent .

If the data store is not connected to an app, see Connect a data store to
app and authorize
Gemini Enterprise .

To use your agent that&#39;s connected to your custom MCP server, see Use an
agent .

 Send feedback

Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License , and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License . For details, see the Google Developers Site Policies . Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Last updated 2026-09-18 UTC.

 Need to tell us more?

 [[["Easy to understand","easyToUnderstand","thumb-up"],["Solved my problem","solvedMyProblem","thumb-up"],["Other","otherUp","thumb-up"]],[["Hard to understand","hardToUnderstand","thumb-down"],["Incorrect information or sample code","incorrectInformationOrSampleCode","thumb-down"],["Missing the information/samples I need","missingTheInformationSamplesINeed","thumb-down"],["Other","otherDown","thumb-down"]],["Last updated 2026-09-18 UTC."],[],[]]

 